---
layout: post
title:  "Book Notes: The Hard Thing About Hard Things"
date:   2020-06-08
categories: books
tags: [books]
---

Here are some of my notes after reading *The Hard Thing About Hard Things* by Ben Horowitz

# Biographical

Ben Horowitz's parents were members of the American Communist movement and he grew up in this environment in Berkeley. He both played football in high school and was one of the smart kids and this impacted him as he saw there were many differences in how different groups of people think. He went to Columbia to study computer science and then went to UCLA to get his masters in CS. After graduating he went to work at Silicon Graphics as a software engineer. He applied to work at Netscape and met Marc Andreessen.

He started Loudcloud, a cloud server company with Marc Andreessen on the board. Loudcloud went public to raise money after the dot com crash. Eventually Loudcloud was performing poorly and so he sold the server operations of the company to EDS but kept licensing rights to the software and spun up the company Opsware to only focus on the software. One of the biggest competitors of Opsware was this company called BladeLogic. Horowitz eventually sold the company to HP for $14.25 a share at a valuation of around 1.65 billion dollars and made the decision because of competition from BladeLogic and the emergence of virtualization. He felt that it was not worth the additional multi-year effort to develop software to fit the new paradigm.

He then started a16z with Marc Andreessen as a founder friendly venture capital firm. He was greatly inspired by Michael Ovitz model of designing CAA, a Hollywood talent agency that leveraged a really big network. Before CAA, agencies had agents that would essentially act independently under the brand. They would each acquire their own networks. However, combining their networks would have made a huge difference. The same was true of venture capital before a16z, where venture firms were really small. a16z also only wants partners who have had experience founding and running companies.

# Management Tips

Education is something that is highly undervalued in companies. Mentorship is a responsibility of managers. 3 hrs spent preparing a 1 hr lecture that can improve 10 engineer’s productivity by 1% turns out to be a huge benefit from a cost-benefit analysis perspective. One of the big reasons employees want to work for a company is growth and learning opportunities

The one-on-one is a really important meeting that is a chance for managers to understand employees, the manager should do 90% of the listening. 

When you do a layoff, do only one and promise not to lay off anyone after that single event. Otherwise, you create distrust among employees.

Oftentimes there will be a pressure to get an outside CEO or bring in outside management to “get adult supervision”. This could be a good idea but oftentimes it is not since you always want to hire the best person for the company now rather than the best person for the job in 6 months. The superstar outside executive will be ineffective inside a small company, lacking the initiative that a small company needs. They will seem incompetent to employees and will lose all credibility in 6 months when they might start showing their abilities.

Very important to show culture, not just say it. For example, Amazon used to have people work on desks that were cheap door frames with legs attached to signal the virtue of frugality (also leaving an empty chair in meetings to represent the customer). a16z has a rule where partners are fined $10 for each minute they are late to a meeting with a founder to show how they value founders.

# Peacetime vs. Wartime CEOs

Peacetime CEOs are CEOs who are leading a company that has a strong market lead against competitors and is not in a dire situation to raise money. The goal of a peacetime CEO is to continue improving the core product as well as encouraging creativity to create new opportunities. An example of a peacetime company would be Google when Eric Schmidt was CEO as Google was dominant in search and didn’t have much competition.

A wartime CEO is a CEO who is leading a company that is undergoing a lot of competition and is strapped for cash, on the border of bankruptcy. The goal of a wartime CEO is to get everyone in the company on the same page and executing on the single goal of survival. Wartime CEOs often need to be mean to make a point. Steve Jobs and Andy Grove are wartime CEOs.

Andy Grove was CEO of Intel when he decided to change the entire money-making strategy of the company, leaving the domain of memory as a result of strong competition from Japanese companies.
